# JTBD Research

Reference : THRV JTBD PDF Document. <Add link>

What is JTBD

How to use JTBD to align your teams with customers goals

Co-ordinate EPD, marketing and sales teams

How to calculate revenue growth and equity value using JTBD

They are not buying products. They are hiring your products to get a job done.

Customer’s struggle to get a job done → Focus area!

Goal of the product : Satisfy unmet customer needs.

<aside>
💡 Products are merely a point-in-time solutions that help customers achieve a goal in their personal or professional lives. Products get a job done.

</aside>

### Define the market using customer’s point of view

- Job beneficiary
- Job executor

Job beneficiary is a reason market exists. 

In B2B markets benefiary and executor are different. 

Example

JTBD based market definitions

1. Navigation app → Get to a destination on time
2. CRM software → Acquire new customers
3. Phlebomy tube → Obtain a blood sample

Look for stable JTBDs over time : Market to execute jobs.

<aside>
💡 **Markets exist because customers are struggling to get a job done at a price they are willing to pay.**

</aside>

Ask customers, what are they willing to pay to get a job done. 

We plot the customer’s willingness to pay to get the job done on a curve from high to low. Need curve. Area under the curve is the size of the market.

Securable market is area under the need curve : 

?? → Area under the curve of willingness to pay and underserved customers!

<aside>
💡 **Pending** : Dig deeper into how to define the market.

</aside>

**Jobs Theory**

- A c**ustomer need** is a metric use to judge how quickly and accurately they can execute their job
- Every need in a job is defined by an **action** executor must take and a **variable** that must be known for a job to be executed successfully

<aside>
💡 If a job executor cannot get the job done accurately and quickly, it causes anxiety and dissatisfaction

</aside>

**Process of identifying needs using JTBD**

To identify customer needs, deconstruct your customer’s JTBD into different job steps. 

Job Steps : what customers need to accomplish to get a job done.

Job Step Type : 

- Identify
- Plan
- Execute
- Assess
- Revise
- Conclude

<aside>
💡 JTBD : 
- 6-10 job steps, 
- Each job step has 5-10 needs ( actions & variables)

</aside>

**Example :** 

JTBD : Getting to a destination on time 

Job step

- Identification Step → Estimating the departure time, determining how much time to allow for vehicle preparation, determinig how much to allow for atypical travel conditions, determining how much time for errands along the way
- Planning step → Needs : Determine optimal sequence of stops, Determine the routes to make planned stops, Determine the amount of time added to make the stoops, Determine if parking is avalPlan the stops, Set the departure time, Decide whether or not to make the drive, Determine if location will be open while arriving
- Execution Step → Walk to the vehicle, travel to destination, make planned stops
- Assessment Step : Assess if the destination will reach on time
- Revision step : Reset the route if needed
- Conclusion step : park the vehicle, Walk to destination

Customer wants to get the job done accurately & Quickly.

- Customer needs to do the action quickly and the variable needs to be accurate
- To assess speed & accuracy, We look at the time it takes to complete the action and accuracy with current solutions

<aside>
💡 Solving a problem someone knows and perceives they have is much lower risk and trying to convince them that their current situation is a problem

</aside>

Surveys : 

- Do the customer understands current accuracy, speed is a struggle
- Customer effort surveys → customer’s perception of how much effort it takes for them to get their job done

**Unmet needs** 

Can be measured using three metrics : 

- A customer effort score
- Speed of satisfying the need
- Accuracy of satisfying the nee

**Competitive analysis** 

- How fast & accurately a competitor’s product satisfies customer needs
- threats from unmet needs

**Generate feature ideas**

- Unmet customer needs
- Competitor’s weakness

→ Generate Product feature ideas

All customer needs have an action and variable. All new ideas help customer get the job done faster and accurate.

Job executor, Job beneficiary, and Purchase decision maker.

Consumption Jobs : Interface

- Create account to use the application
- Prepare to use the application
- Learn to use the applicaiton
- Use the application to satisfy needs
- Monitor needs
- Modify application to satisfy needs

### Job Theory and Consumption Jobs

- App Store helps customer do purchase jobs faster
- SaaS applications help interface, installation, and purchase jobs faster and accurately
- Eliminate steps!

**Development** 

- assess the tasks
- budgets
- risks

**Messaging & Positioning**

- positioning → how you differentiate your product
    - Defensible position in your market by identifying by job step and needs that you satisfy differently from the customers
- Messaging
    - how you communicate value
    - Messaging is not focused on the product & its features
    - Messaging needs to be based on JTBD faster and more accurately
    - Use → unmet needs and emotional jobs
        - emotional jobs → How customers want to feel, how they want to be perceived when doing the functional job
        - Reduced anxiety
        - Messaging : What the solution does for them, why it is valuable, all without using any technical or confusing jargons

**Project Revenue growth**

<Todo>

---

---

### Example