# Week 4

## Communicating persuasively with data

- Prove with data
- Mistakes
    - Failing to connect data to metrics we care about
    - Address questions or concerns of of our audience

**Building the effective narrative**

**Cogent Narratives**

SCQA → 

- **Situation** - context current state of business, product and users, Goal we are working towards, why this goal makes sense
- **Complication** -  Barriers, What is preventing us from achieving our goal?
- **Question** - The main questions we are trying to solve
- **Answer** -  Solutions to barriers

**4 types of communication :** 

- Strategic Recommendation - pivot to new project or approach
- Discovery Update
- Delivery update
- Product Impact  - reporting on product impact

**Strategic Recommendation**

- Situation
- Barriers → If each barrier is solved, what % closer we are to achieving our goal
- Questions →
- Solution → proposed solutions
    - Elephant in the room problem → Solutions that fail to meaningfully impact
    - Big Swing → Outlandish, expensive solution

 

<aside>
💡 Audience metrics and audience concerns should be accounted for. PMs need to anticipate how a plan will be perceived.

</aside>

---

---

## Effective Data Visualisation

Simple. Accurate. Clear.

An easy to read chart of that tells of an exciting insight can be an easy career win! 

**Tips** 

- Put the key takeaway in the headline
- Always chart title and axis labels
- 2 most common graphs
    - Line charts → trends over time
    - Tables → show patterns and relationships
        - Round table data
        - Order data by size
        - Use medians, averages, totals, %
        - Table lines of different color & weights
        - Highlighting noteworthy cells
        

---

---

### Leveraging your data sources

<aside>
💡 Strong relationships with Data Analyst is important! Mutual beneficial relationships with data analyst.

</aside>

Leverage with Data teams 

- **Technical Leverage**  → Speak technical language
- **Operational leverage** → What will the process followed, what is the segmentation, metric definition
- **Contextual leverage → Understanding the priorities across product and data teams in discovering and delivering most important items of the busines**

**Pitfalls with relationships**

- Making ineffective data requests
- Asking questions that are too broad
- Don’t ask too narrow questions that only incrementally help you

**Types of data requests**

- Data extractions - Raw data that you can’t access on your own
- Decision based queries -
- Exploratory insight generation

“why” behind the data request

[https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1h0o2yQoBYLSOphzJKZSh9JLNCEGZw5vx301Mf4_E3DU/edit#gid=1183384183](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1h0o2yQoBYLSOphzJKZSh9JLNCEGZw5vx301Mf4_E3DU/edit#gid=1183384183)

Solution, feature or metric connected

Development timeline

Hypothesis

 

<aside>
💡 Don’t treat data as an isolated service. Potential avenues - Scrum, daily standups, Think Tanks. Connections b/w metrics, analysis & key OKRs

</aside>

**Processes** 

- Slack channel for data requests. JIRA ticket
- Goal oriented and recurring meetings

Small org

Mid size org

<aside>
💡 Share roadmap

</aside>

### Indicators that we are maximizing leverage

- highly engaged data team
- Discussions are rooted to user problem
- PMs +Ve ly impacted data team’s development and growth
- Trust b/w data and PM team
- Alignment of goals and priorities

---

---

## DIY Data Onboarding

- Crowdsource all available data sets
- Calibrate low/high confidence data
- Assessing relevance based on altitude map

**Why to do this?** 

- We up-skill quickly
- Strengthens our relationship with the data team

**Crowdsource all available data sets**

- Check user experience data which is qualitative but validate data
- Check Google drive and etc..
- Go expansive!!
- Data roll-ups → Pre-built data reporting/ dashboards, etc → Metrics that team have been identified as relevant by your team. Ask follow up questions, what data tables are used,
- Customer/Event Analytics →  Mixpanel, Amplitude, etc
- Data warehouses/Data tables → Google bigquery, Mysql, Snowflake

**Example** 

A PM starts new role in monetisation team in ride share company. PM reviews

- Strategy decks → What is the market? Why this market? Competitors? How are winning this market?
- KPIs org most cares about → MAU, CAC, LTV
- Reviews Data tooling
- Connects with Data team →Tables, etc
- Cross-functional teams
- Independent Research

---

**Caliberate confidence on data source**

- Evaluate Quality
    - 80-20 rule
    - How data is sorted, aggregated, and live testing results
    - How recent the data is, length of data, Low null or missing values
- Consider the context by evolution of data asset
    - 
- Determine the ease of use **of the self service tool**
    - Tools with UI are easy to use
    - Bigquery, etc require
    - Product monitoring and reliability data
    - Customer complaint triage data → Datadog, appdynamics, etc

<aside>
💡 High confidence data and flawed data

</aside>

---

**Assessing Relevance and building the repository**

- Based on my altitude scorecard, what data, metrics are relevant to be successful?
- Have industry overview and company trends
- Competitor research and industry trends from VC or consulting reports
- Company trends
    - Churn rates
    - Spend trends
    - Service usage trends
    - User state trends
    - New user acquisition trends

<aside>
💡 Repository of highly relevant data sets!!

</aside>

**2 examples**

- Retention cohorts
- Core actions like live streaming, within 28 day buckets, current behaviour trends
- GoJek
    - Focused on macro data
    - Company spending trends
    - Monthly service usage trends
    - New user trends
- Repository
    - <maintain>
    - instrumentation backlog
    
    ---
    
    ---
    
    Live classroom