# Churn Analysis

**Motivation** 

- Subscription businesses → Retention is the most important metric, which means it is important to analyse churn in and out
- You can build all the best features and acquire thousands of customers, but your startup will never thrive if you can't keep any around. Your first and foremost responsibility is to focus on the most valuable features of your app and make them sticky. For that, you need to understand churn.
- Churn is hole in the boat
- VCs will be looking at churn as a great indicator of whether or not you have good product/market fit.

Ways to analyse when and why user are churning from the product

- Cohort Analysis - understanding of product usage, churn, CLV
    
    <aside>
    💡 What you want to see in cohort analysis is that younger cohorts show better retention. Also, churn tend to stablise after first few lifetime months because people who never adopted the product in the first place are now gone
    
    </aside>
    
- NPS survey - response based on NPS score
- 

**ARTICLE - [https://www.appcues.com/blog/why-pms-have-been-measuring-customer-churn-all-wrong](https://www.appcues.com/blog/why-pms-have-been-measuring-customer-churn-all-wrong)**

- Big numbers to look at to get an understanding of churn
- Kind of churn
    - Customer churn - # of customers churned/ total number of customers
        - Focus on high percentage of customers to stick around longer
    - Revenue churn - revenue churned /  overall revenue
        - Is measure of lost revenue MOM represented as a normalized value - MRR
- Look Deeper
    - Churn could be misleading because users might not churn (cancel subscription) but are still not engaged or dissatisfied and will churn eventually hurting really bad in the long term. Therefore critical to look at - User Engagement
    - User Engagement
        - Active users per month - DAU/MAUs
        - Avg session interval - how much time elapses between customer visits to the app
        - Avg session length
        - Find sticky (decrease churn) and less sticky features (improve churn)
        - Which features are most used - which part of the app users enjoy most
        - Behavorial cohorts to figure out what behaviours are triggering retention

<aside>
💡 As a product manager, you want to look deeper and analyze big numbers with scrutiny.

</aside>

**ARTICLE - [https://engineering.shopify.com/blogs/engineering/defining-churn-rate-no-really-this-actually-requires-an-entire-blog-post](https://engineering.shopify.com/blogs/engineering/defining-churn-rate-no-really-this-actually-requires-an-entire-blog-post)**

- Churn rate is a customer level metric and its important, you can read here [https://tim.blog/2009/05/19/vanity-metrics-vs-actionable-metrics/](https://tim.blog/2009/05/19/vanity-metrics-vs-actionable-metrics/)
- Shopify's definition of churn rate
    - churn rates are reported with some segmentation because new customers will inevitably have more churn compared to mature users
    - If you don't apply some form of segmentation in your reporting you will find that your churn rate increases whenever your ratio of new customers to mature customers increases; even though it may be that the churn rates of both new and mature customers are dropping.
    - No aggregate is ever going to perfectly communicate a particular customer behaviour: an aggregate is lossy compression after all.

**ARTICLE - [https://mobiledevmemo.com/monthly-churn-terrible-metric/](https://mobiledevmemo.com/monthly-churn-terrible-metric/)**

**ARTICLE - [https://www.forentrepreneurs.com/why-churn-is-critical-in-saas/](https://www.forentrepreneurs.com/why-churn-is-critical-in-saas/)**

- Article focuses on revenue churn especially in the context of how to build a product with negative revenue churn
- Should track MRR growth from each → new subscription + expansion (upsell or cross-sell) -churn and  net MRR growth as well
- Tactics to reduce churn
    - Talk to customers
    - measure customer engagement - some sort of key features and customer engagement score
    - Figure out what features make products sticky
        
        <aside>
        💡 Try to become a core part of that individual’s regular workflow is one way to get stickiness, and the other is to become the repository for some critical data. Once you become the system of record for that data, it is much harder to switch to another service
        
        </aside>
        
- Try long term contracts
    - possibility of longer commitments
- Other factors that correlate with churn
    - kind of customers churning - who are most profitable customers
    - customers from an acquisition channel, leads, source churn more or less
    

**ARTICLE - [https://churnzero.net/insightful-ways-to-analyze-churn-saas-quick-ratio-as-a-growth-trajectory-tricks-for-up-selling-cross-selling/](https://churnzero.net/insightful-ways-to-analyze-churn-saas-quick-ratio-as-a-growth-trajectory-tricks-for-up-selling-cross-selling/)**

- Go Beyond the basic churn metric
- Measure churn by revenue - revenue churn - customers are not equal in how much money their bring - accurate view of how much business you are losing
- Analysing by customer cohorts to firgure out when customers churn and doubling down efforts
- Marketing channels
- Churn type - customers cancel for different reasons and in different ways and it’s helpful to distinguish between these the major differences.
    - Active Churn - The customer chooses to cancel your service. There are a multitude of reasons why a customer might cancel, from internal business changes to choosing a competitor to simply not understanding the product. And this segment of churn is likely where you want to focus most of your energy.
    - Happy churn - customer cancels despite a positive experience. Typically their job is finished. Do they reactivate at a later date when job arises?
    - Passive churn - The customer didn’t bother to update their credit card information, they slipped into cancellation
    - Vertical churn - Some type of businesses are churning. What aspects of your businesses are "not a fit" for these type of businesses
    - Plan type - Customers will cancel out of, or contract from, a service plan when they don’t see the full value. If a certain plan is losing more customers than average, dig into it to figure out why these customers aren’t committed to your service.

## **Revenue Churn Analysis**

**Metrics**

- Cumulative MRR chart - month on month cumulative monthly recurring revenue
- Net MRR growth =  revenue added from (new users + resurrected users + expansion) - revenue lost from (contraction + churn)
- Quick ratio = revenue from (new users + resurrected users + expansion) / revenue lost from (contraction + churn)
    - Subscription businesses should have high quick ratio unlike businesses like E-commerce etc
    - Businesses like Slack (land and then expand) we should see lot of expansion revenues
    - Enterprise SaaS ratio > 4 is really good

<aside>
💡 Such kind of accounting can be done any quantity apart from MAU and MRR. Example - L28 metrics counts the number of days a user is active in last 28 days. Summed across all users will get Total sum of DAU for last month. User expands or contracts if L28 number goes up or down. You can do monthly growth accounting of DAU.

</aside>

<aside>
💡 Cumulative graph of metric vs growth accounting of metric = cumulative graph hides the nature of the growth (is it happening because of new users or resurrected or expansion users or is it that churn or contraction is less?). Growth accounting of metric shows the nature of the growth and less churn, less contraction is a clear sign continued usage among existing users and thus makes sense to invest in the top of the funnel

</aside>

- if customers can typically cancel the subscription with 30 days notice or next month billing then better to calculate MRR
- Lets divide MRR ( or Trailing 30 days) into
    - MRR from new customers (new customers came in trailing 30 days)
    - MRR from existing customers who renew (retained customers from previous period)
    - Expansion MRR (incremental increases from upgrades and add ons) (incremental revenue in trailing 30 days)
    - ARR losses from contraction (downgrades) and churn (lost customers) (decrement in revenue in trailing 30 days due to contraction and churn)
- or MRR = Avg revenue per paying user (ARPU) * number of paying users
- Net MRR = New customers MRR + MRR existing customers + Expansion MRR - Churn MRR - Contraction MRR
- Net MRR growth rate  = (Net MRR this month - Net MRR last month) / Net MRR for last month * 100
- Net MRR churn rate = (Churn + contraction MRR  - Expansion MRR) / Total net MRR at start of the month * 100
- MRR Churn Rate = (Churn + contraction MRR) / Total MRR at the start of the month * 100
- Net New MRR = new MRR + Expansion - churn - contraction (can do growth accounting like above)

**ARPA = Average MRRevenue Per Account (Can also be calculate for ARPA for new customers )**

- Monthly revenue at the end of the month / # of customers at the end of the month

**How do you achieve Negative Churn?**

Getting to negative churn requires that you can do one or more of the following three things:

- **Expand revenue from your current product**. This is best done by having a pricing model that increases the pricing according to some usage metric that will grow over time. As an example, Dropbox charges you more as you use more storage. Email marketing companies charge you more as your email list grow, etc. For more on thinking through how to get your pricing axes designed right, you may want to read this blog post: [Multi-axis Pricing: a key tool for increasing SaaS revenue](https://www.forentrepreneurs.com/multi-axis-pricing-a-key-tool-for-increasing-saas-revenue/).
- **Up-sell** customers to a more highly featured version of your product.
- **Cross-sell** customers to purchase additional products or services.

**Visualisation Revenue Churn**

- MOM Net New MRR growth accounting (helps give nature of the growth)
- MOM Total MRR
- MOM Upgrade, Downgrade and Churn MRR
- MRR by Plan
- Customer Churn, MRR Churn, Net MRR Churn rate
- ARPA - for all customers, new customers
- MOM MRR growth rate in %

**SaaS quick ratio** 

- Measures a company's ability to grow recurring revenue in spite of churn (growth efficiency)
- (New MRR + Expansion MRR) / (Churned MRR + Contraction MRR)
- A high Quick Ratio (low revenue loss, high revenue expansion) confirms the company’s growth rate is both high and stable. The product is successful, the customers are happy, and there is a good framework in place for the business to scale efficiently
- [https://blog.chartmogul.com/saas-quick-ratio/?utm_content=buffer485d0&utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter.com&utm_campaign=buffer#gs.drQ1xWU](https://blog.chartmogul.com/saas-quick-ratio/?utm_content=buffer485d0&utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter.com&utm_campaign=buffer#gs.drQ1xWU)

### Burn Multiple

- is a measure of capital efficiency or efficiency of the growth
- Burn multiple = Net burn / New new ARR  (burn as a multiple of revenue growth)

<aside>
💡  a seed stage company might have a Burn Multiple of 3 because it just started selling. After the Series A, it might drop to 2. After the Series B, when the sales team should be operating at scale, the expectations for efficiency increase even more. Eventually, for a company to become profitable, burn must reach 0, which implies that the Burn Multiple should also approach 0 over time.

</aside>

- [https://medium.com/craft-ventures/the-burn-multiple-51a7e43cb200](https://medium.com/craft-ventures/the-burn-multiple-51a7e43cb200)

References

- [https://churnzero.net/insightful-ways-to-analyze-churn-saas-quick-ratio-as-a-growth-trajectory-tricks-for-up-selling-cross-selling/](https://churnzero.net/insightful-ways-to-analyze-churn-saas-quick-ratio-as-a-growth-trajectory-tricks-for-up-selling-cross-selling/)
- [https://www.forentrepreneurs.com/why-churn-is-critical-in-saas/](https://www.forentrepreneurs.com/why-churn-is-critical-in-saas/)

**SaaS basic template for cohort analysis** 

[ChristophJanz_SaaSCohortAnalysis1.xlsx](Churn%20Analysis%2042a461389f0f4058835068ace280da48/ChristophJanz_SaaSCohortAnalysis1.xlsx)

[SaaSMetricsDashboardChristophJanzv1.0b.xlsx](Churn%20Analysis%2042a461389f0f4058835068ace280da48/SaaSMetricsDashboardChristophJanzv1.0b.xlsx)

[LTV](Churn%20Analysis%2042a461389f0f4058835068ace280da48/LTV%2005aaf8e35d3447cf95dbe63ceeaf2a9c.md)